Tony Kaizen:
What's up, Life in English family? Y'all have been asking me
to make an episode about the word "ain't" for a very, very
long time, and it's finally here. Okay, I'm going to
deliver this episode in three parts. First, I'm going to
teach you all the ways we use this word and in which
context. Second, I'll show you some real world examples of
people using this word, and we'll test your English
comprehension to see how well you understand what's being
said. And finally, I'm going to teach you about the cultural
aspect of this word. So let's take a look at the various
meanings of this word. The first one or the first way we use
this word is in place of the verb "to be", right? So the
word "ain't" can mean "am not" or "is not"
or "are not" and "am", "is", and "are" are conjugations of
the verb "to be", right? So let's start with "am not".
Here's some examples. Number one, "I am not your daddy." "I
am not your daddy." We can say that in a different way,
or we can say that same phrase in a different way by saying,
"I ain't your daddy", so "I am not your daddy" becomes "I
ain't your daddy." Same thing. Okay, next example. "I am not
the one to play with." A more natural way to say that at
least where I'm from is "I ain't the one to play with." And
it's the same thing. Another example. "I am not trippin." Or
"I ain't trippin." Same thing, okay? Now let's look at some
examples of "is not". The first one. "It is not that big of
a deal." "It's not that big of a deal, man." Another way to
say that using the word "ain't" is "It ain't that big of a
deal. Chill, man, it ain't that big of a deal. Relax. Relax,
bro." Alright, another example. "He is not going to want to
do it." I could also say "He ain't gonna want to do it."
Same thing. Another example.
"She is not the type to just sit around and do nothing." I
could also say "She ain't the type to just sit around and do
nothing," and I'd be saying the same thing. So now let's
take a look at some examples of "are not". Number one. "You
are not the one with the problem. I am." Or I could say "You
ain't the one with the problem. I am." Okay? Another
example. "You are not the boss of me." Or I could say "You
ain't the boss of me." Same thing.
Alright, another example. Last one. "You are not shit." We
would never say this naturally in casual conversation. The
version of this phrase using the word "ain't" is what we
would say. So I'll say that now, "You ain't shit."
Technically, you're saying "You are not shit," but that
sounds weird. But when I say "You ain't shit," that sounds
natural to me and that expression just means you're not
worth anything. Similar to saying that somebody is a piece
of shit. So if somebody says "Man, you ain't shit," it's
like, depending on who says it in the context, it could be a
joke or it could be a bad thing that means you're just
worthless. You're a worthless human being. Alright. But
anyway, that is "am not", "is not", and "are not", okay?
Another way we can use the word "ain't" is in place of "has
not" and "have nots".
So let me give you some examples starting with "has not".
Number one, "He hasn't..." or "He has not been himself
lately." I could also say "He ain't been himself lately,"
and it's the same thing. Another example, "She hasn't..." or
"She has not even called him yet." "She hasn't even called
them yet." Or I could say "She ain't even called him yet."
Alright. Another example. "It hasn't even been 5 minutes."
Or "It ain't even been 5 minutes." Alright. Now, here are
some examples of "have not". Number one, "I have not seen
you in a while." Or "I ain't seen you in a while."
Same thing. Okay, another example. "You have not done it
since last week." Or "You ain't done it since last week,
bro." Alright.
Another example. "They have not called me yet." Or "They
ain't called me yet." Same thing.
Now, another way we can use the word "ain't" is in place of
"do not" and "did not" in specific cases. So let me give you
some examples for "do not". "I do not have time for this."
"I do not have time for this." Another way I can say that is
"I ain't got time for this," and it's the same thing.
Alright. Another example. "I do not have any money." Or "I
ain't got no money." And it's the same...I'm saying the same
exact thing, okay? Now, some examples of "did not". Number
one. "I did not ask for that." Or "I ain't ask for that."
Okay?
Another example. "We didn't know what to do." "We didn't
know what to do." Or "We ain't know what to do." The same
thing as saying "We did not know what to do." Okay, now the
last way we can use this is not necessarily a definition,
but we often use the word "ain't" in sentences that involve
"nobody". So let me give you an example. In standard
English, you might say something like, "No one called you,"
right? Maybe somebody walks into the room and says, "Hey,
did you call me?" "No, no one called you." Right? Another
way I could say that is, "Ain't nobody call you." Like "Nah.
Ain't nobody call you, bro. Relax, ain't nobody call you."
And I'm...what I'm saying is "Nobody called you." Or "No one
called you." Another example. "No one wants to hear that."
Maybe your music is trash or you're just...you're
complaining, you're whining, something like that. Something
that nobody wants to hear. You can say "Nobody wants to hear
that." Or "No one wants to hear that." Or you could say,
"Ain't nobody trying to hear that, bruh." "Ain't nobody
trying to hear that." So it's just an informal dialect of
English and I'm just trying to get you to understand that
it's the same thing as saying "No one wants to hear that."
It's just a different way of speaking and I won't get into
the details of that way of speaking in this episode, because
this episode is about the word "ain't" so let's stay on
topic. Next example, "No one is concerned with..." or
"paying attention to you." That's a standard English phrase.
But I could also say, "Ain't nobody worried about you,
bruh." So alright. So "No one is concerned with you." "No
one is paying attention to you." Or "Ain't nobody worried
about you." It's the same thing, just a more informal way of
saying it, okay? Now, we've gone over all the definitions
and uses, or at least the basics of the definitions and uses
of the word "ain't". Now we are going to test your English,
my friend, and see how much you can actually understand when
you hear real people using this word. So let's take a look
at the first example.
First Example (woman):
"Um, this whole, you know, sort of finding compassion and
common ground with your enemies thing is kind of like a
political, spiritual practice for me. And I ain't the Dalai
Lama."
Tony Kaizen:
Alright. So did you hear what she said? She said, "I ain't
the Dalai Lama." Now, what does that mean? How would you say
that in standard English? Well, I would say, "I'm not the
Dalai Lama" or "I am not the Dalai Lama." So "I am not"
becomes "I ain't". And just in case you're sitting there
wondering, "What is a Dalai Lama? What is that? How do you
even spell that?" Well, Dalai Lama in English is spelled
D-a-l-a-i, Dalai...L-a-m-a,
Lama, and I'm sure I'm pronouncing that incorrectly. I don't
know how you actually say that, but in standard American
English we say Dalai Lama. And the way I understand it, if
I'm not mistaken, this is what they call the spiritual
leader of Tibetan Buddhism, just in case you were wondering.
But let's move on to the next example.
Second Example (man):
"Well, well, that's it. I mean, why why undergo..."
Second Example (woman):
"The mayor...mayor..."
Second Example (man):
"...the scrutiny and the brickbats and the disrespect and
everything else? I mean, that takes a certain type of
psychological makeup to, you know, want to withstand..."
Second Example (woman):
"It's what Sanders says really, is you need a revolution."
Second Example (man):
"Yeah, but you ain't getting a revolution."
Tony Kaizen:
Alright. So did you guys catch that one? The woman said,
"You need a revolution." And the man said, "But you ain't
getting a revolution. You ain't getting one." Right? So how
would you say that in standard English? I would say, "You
are not getting a revolution." "You are not getting a
revolution." "You ain't getting a revolution, my friend."
Same thing. So "you are not" becomes "you ain't." Alright,
next example.
Third Example (man):
"And then finally, licenses and approval.
So you have a license to do something that is not many
people can do or an approval that is a pretty solid economic
moat. Casinos, not easy to get a casino license here. Six of
them in Macau. That's it. They ain't giving out anymore."
Tony Kaizen:
Alright. So hopefully you guys caught that. This guy is
talking about...He's really talking about...Excuse me...He's
talking about different businesses and he ended by talking
about casinos, right? Apparently, you need a license to open
a casino, and the man said, "They ain't giving out anymore."
So how would you say that in standard English? Well, I would
say, "They are not giving out anymore." "They are not"
becomes "they ain't." And you might be asking yourself,
"What does giving out mean?" Well, in this context, it means
"to distribute", okay? So basically what he's saying is
they're not distributing or they're not issuing or "giving
out" more casino licenses so you cannot attain one anymore.
That's the basic idea of what he was saying but the focus is
on the word "ain't" so hopefully you understood that part.
So let's move on to the last example.
Last Example (man):
"This is going really, really, really focused on money, on
your relationship with money, and it teaches a system of how
to manage money because the theory is when you get to the
point where you're able to manage your money, even if you
ain't got none, right? You manage the budget and you manage
what little you have coherently, then the magic of the
universe is that when we prove we can manage some, we will
get more."
Tony Kaizen:
Alright. So in that clip, he was talking about money,
managing money, and he said something like, "Once you learn
how to manage your money, even if you ain't got none, even
if you ain't got none..." So what does that mean? How would
you say that in standard English? Well, I would say, "Even
if you don't have any," because remember, we're talking
about money. So once you learn how to manage your money,
even if "you don't have any" or even if "you ain't got
none," then you will get more. That's the idea. And this is
an example of a super common sentence structure, right?
"Ain't got no." It's really, really common in some places
here in the US, and remember, this just means "does not
have" or "do not have". It's the same thing. So the idea
here is that you need to learn how to manage your money,
even if "you don't have any" or even if "you ain't got
none", and you will receive more. Alright? So, my friend,
now, let me tell you about the linguistic characteristics of
this word. And this is probably the most important part of
this episode, because there's a lot of conflicting
information about the word "ain't" and whether it's
grammatically correct or incorrect. Now, linguistically,
"ain't" is formed by the same rule that English speakers use
to form "aren't" and other contractions of auxiliary verbs
like "isn't" or "won't" or "doesn't", etc.. Now linguists
consider usage of the word "ain't" to be grammatical as long
as its users convey their intended meaning to their
audience. In other words, a sentence such as, "She ain't got
no sense." is grammatically correct because it generally
follows a native's word order...a native speaker's word
order, I mean. And because a native speaker would recognize
the meaning of that sentence, it's grammatically correct,
you see? But linguists draw a distinction, however, between
grammatically "correct" and "acceptable", you see? What may
be considered "grammatically correct" across many dialects
may nevertheless, or may still be considered unacceptable in
certain dialects or certain contexts, right? The usage of
the word "ain't" is "socially unacceptable" in some
situations, but it's not "grammatically incorrect". Right?
Because natives actually use that word in a logical way.
Their sentences follow an actual pattern. There's a real
structure there that they use and understand so it's correct
to them, and I should say "us", because I'm talking about
us, right? Now, the usage of the word "ain't" is a
continuing subject of controversy in the English language
and the English education industry, if we can call it that,
right? Now, "ain't" is commonly used by many native speakers
in oral and informal settings, especially in certain regions
or dialects of English. Now it's usage is often highly
stigmatized, and it can be used by the general public as a
marker of low socioeconomic status or education level,
right? It's generally used or it's not used...it's generally
considered nonstandard English in most dictionaries. But in
my humble opinion, trying to classify people by the way they
speak is an elitist's way of segregating and judging people
based on something that doesn't say anything about a
person's character, right? Like there isn't a right or wrong
way to speak. There isn't a high or low class way of
speaking. There are simply different ways of speaking. And
people from different regions speak in different ways. And
just because people in my city speak differently from the
people in New York City doesn't mean one of us is speaking
incorrectly. Everyone in my city understands me perfectly,
so I'm obviously speaking correctly. It's all subjective,
which is exactly why it makes no sense to try to determine
what the correct way of speaking is because it doesn't
exist. If the sentence follows the typical pattern of speech
that a native will use, then it's grammatically correct. If
a native understands it but simply thinks you shouldn't say
it, that doesn't mean it's incorrect. It means that person
thinks what you said was unacceptable. So always try to
remember there's a difference between those two things. But
why do I think that understanding the social aspect of this
word is so important? It's because after teaching English
for a few years, I met a lot of people who pride themselves
on knowing things about slang, informal dialects and what
they know of as "Black English". But most of them don't
really understand why we say the things we say. People will
hear a native say something and simply repeat it. And of
course, that's normal. I'm just saying that it's important
to truly understand what it is you're saying and why you are
saying it. It's important to understand how a community of
people will see and interpret your words and behavior when
you speak a certain way or use certain words, and you don't
have to care, but you should understand. So in this
particular case, with the word "ain't", you need to
understand that there are a lot of elitist and snobby people
who are going to look down on you for using words like
"ain't" or speaking some informal dialect of English. There
are people who would think you're of low class or you're
uneducated or you're from the streets, or you grew up on a
farm somewhere in the country. But the reality is people of
all colors, classes, and ages use this word in daily
conversations. It just depends on where you're from and the
context of the situation. So once you understand this word
and how to use it, feel free to use it in any informal
conversation. Now, another thing I want to say about the
social aspect of this word is that if you want to speak an
informal dialect of English or you want to use slang just
like a native, you've got to remember that it's not just
what you say, it's how you say it. In fact, how you say it
is really what makes all the difference. That's why I'm
always teaching you how we really speak, but reminding you
that you don't have to speak the same way. Many times, you
might end up sounding even more unnatural because you're
just so determined to use slang and idioms but you only know
the definitions of the words and phrases. You still don't
know how to express them like a native does. So just take
some time to really understand the culture of the people
like whom you're trying to speak and what makes their way of
communicating unique. And as always, practice, practice, and
practice some more. Now, if you find this episode helpful,
please take the time to share it with someone that you think
would appreciate it. Also, if you'd like to join a growing
community of English learners from around the world and
learn some real English with some real people, consider
joining the Life in English community. You'll get access to
our private conversation group on Discord and transcripts
and vocabulary guides for all the podcast episodes to make
sure you understand and internalize every single word.
Alright? We're really trying to have a positive impact on
the way the world learns English and with your support, we
can grow our team, produce a lot more content, and help a
lot more people. So for more information about how you can
join the community, check the links in the description of
this episode, or just visit lifeinenglish.net/community. And
as always, thank you so much for your time and your
attention. I really hope you enjoyed and learned from this
episode. My name is Tony Kaizen and this is the Life in
English podcast and I will talk to you soon. Peace!